WOODRUFF: Chuck Berry was a
pioneer in his field, often
referred to as the father of
rock 'n' roll who influenced
a generation of musicians.
Now, three months after
his death at age 90,
he's back, in a way.
Jeffrey Brown explains.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
JEFFREY BROWN, PBS NEWSHOUR
CORRESPONDENT: You know
it when you hear it.
Beginning in the mid-1950s,
Chuck Berry helped define the
sound and look, the attitude and
raw power of rock 'n' roll.
The man is now gone, but his
music lives on, in a new album,
titled "Chuck," berry's first
album since 1979.
He'd worked on the project off
and on for several decades,
and on his 90th birthday,
five months before his
death, had announced
its imminent release.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: So,
here's one of his Cadillacs.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Yes.
BROWN: I was joined recently
by the star's son Charles and
grandson Charlie at the National
Museum of African-American
History and Culture for some
personal memories of the man and
his music.
CHARLES BERRY, JR., SON OF
CHUCK BERRY: This was a guy
when he was a little boy he sold
vegetables off a
cart with his father.
This is a man that worked
at a General Motors
plant, not assembling the
cars, but as a janitor.
He heard from other people the
significance that he brought
to the table, but my -- he
didn't really dwell on that.
CHARLES BERRY III, GRANDSON
OF CHUCK BERRY: I remember in
elementary school, I'd have
teachers coming up to me
like, who's your grandfather?
I'd be like, pawpaw (ph).
They were like, that's so cool.
BROWN (on camera): Did
you have any idea who your
grandfather was in history?
CHARLES BERRY III: I always
knew he played the guitar,
but I didn't think he was like
this bigger than life
person to everybody else
because he was just pawpaw.
BROWN: Yes.
Oh, boy, did he play
the guitar, huh?
CHARLES BERRY III: Oh, yes.
BROWN (voice-over): In fact,
both Charles and Charlie play
the guitar and had the chance
to play with Chuck.
Charles is part of the
band for many years.
Since Chuck's death, they've
played on, here just recently
promoting the new album on "The
Tonight Show".
The album charts Chuck
Berry's life in stages,
an autobiographical
epitaph of sorts.
In the song "Big Boys," he
returns to his childhood with
the ambitions of a teenager,
while "The Eyes of Man"
describes the wisdom
of women in his life.
CHARLES BERRY JR.: It's almost
to the point that he was being
philosophical over his life
and letting everybody
else knows, like, hey,
from a wonderful woman
to a big boy to an
eye of a man, here's my book.
Here's the next chapter of
my life that you get to have,
and I hope you enjoy it.
BROWN: Berry continued to
perform into his late '80s,
including his renowned monthly
gig at Blueberry Hill,
a diner and music venue
in his native St. Louis.
ERIC CLAPTON, MUSICIAN: He's
really laid the law down for
playing that kind of music.
BRUCE SPRINGSTEEN, MUSICIAN:
When I'm 65 or 70, I've
got to tell my grandkids.
Yes, I met Chuck Berry.
As a matter of fact, I backed
up Chuck Berry one night.
You did?
Yes.
LITTLE RICHARD, MUSICIAN:
My favorite song with
Chuck is all of 'em.
BROWN: His influence is
everywhere in rock music.
The initial cultural jolt was
jokingly portrayed in the 1985
hit movie, "Back to the Future."
And honored nine years
later in" Pulp Fiction."
KEVIN STRAIT, MUSEUM CURATOR:
Rock and roll has such a firm
place in our cultural memory.
BROWN: Kevin Strait is
a musical historian and
curator at the museum.
STRAIT: He's one of the
primary sonic architects
of rock and roll.
So, he helped establish this
art form that we all know and
love, and that really sort
of took over the world.
Its helm really was this
young musician from St. Louis.
And, you know, he really sort
of helped to sort of establish
the template for how rock
and roll should sound.
You know, he's a
phenomenal guitar player,
phenomenal showman.
BROWN: Strait acquired objects
from Berry for the museum's
musical crossroads collection,
including this prized guitar.
STRAIT: This guitar
is pretty special.
It's a Gibson ES-350T.
I mean, it's one of his early
touring and recording guitars
that he used, and it's nicknamed
Maybellene after his first hit.
BROWN (on camera):
Yes, quite a first hit.
Quite a name, right?
(MUSIC)
BROWN (voice-over): And that
red 1973 Cadillac Eldorado?
Berry drove it on stage in
1986 for his 60th birthday and
the filming of the documentary
"Hail, Hail Rock 'n' Roll".
That was at the Fox Theater
in St. Louis, which had denied
him entry as a child because
he was black.
CHUCK BERRY, MUSICIAN:
And my forefathers a few
blocks away were sold
on the civil courthouse
steps, sold, and
that's a big change.
CHARLES BERRY JR.: It was
difficult, absolutely,
but as opposed to,
man, these white people
are just, they're playing me.
My God, I can't -- nope.
My dad took it as, oh, so you're
telling me I can't go in the
front of this venue to play
in front of this crowd.
OK, I'm going to keep
writing my music.
They're going to change.
I'm going to make it.
I'm going to make a scenario
where the people that are
listening to my music are having
such a blast that skin
color becomes irrelevant.
BROWN (on camera): How do you
see what your grandfather,
what he went through and what
he achieved?
CHARLES BERRY III: That you
could go from selling out a
packed house to then being told
you can't stay in
this hotel room.
That is like I that probably
would have left me pretty
bitter throughout the rest of my
life.
But I don't know because what
he's done with his music and
everything, it's just that much
more amazing because he was
able to do it during that time.
BROWN: A pioneering life
that had dramatic ups
and downs, for sure.
Now, "Chuck" the album
adds new music to what was
already an enormous legacy.
For the "PBS NewsHour", I'm
Jeffrey Brown in Washington.